I envy people who can, in times of great distress, turn to God or a version of
a ‘higher power’ that they unhesitatingly believe in. There is comfort in the
belief that once you let your hardships be known to this powerful figure,
you’ve done the most that you could.

There is also a strange comfort in the belief that it is this powerful figure
who creates your hardships in the first place, for a purpose that is not yet
your business to know.

For atheists like me, there is no such comfort to be had.

When I was a teenager, I traded the comfort of religion for what I believed was
a more rational perspective on life. I still stand by that perspective, but it
comes with its own set of troubles.

A few months ago, when the pandemic started raging across the world and
threatened to destroy everything I know and love, I found myself desperately
wishing I had something or someone to place my faith in.

The choice to not have religion in my life means that in moments like this, I
seek relief in other subjects. Science and art have been faithful companions
when it comes to my belief system and they played their part during the
lockdown. Science kept me informed about facts, numbers, causes and
precautions. Art kept me entertained with literature, cinema, TV, and the
ever-evolving antics of social media. But this time, it just wasn’t enough.

As someone who lives with anxiety, I experienced during the lockdown a
constant, severe state of helplessness, accompanied by the feeling that what
was happening to the world and me was cruel and unfair. As lives, time, jobs
and opportunities were callously being taken away, I became frustrated and
fixated on the injustice of this loss.

I despaired at the fact that I was locked up in my own house with my hopes for
the future turning into ‘lost time’ and ‘futile dreams’. I spent days imagining
and fearing worst-case scenarios and lamenting my inability to do anything
about the situation.

There is nothing quite like a global pandemic to shake up your entire belief
system. Science and art had their own place in mine, but this time, I needed so
much more than to be informed and entertained.

━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

Also read: These Great Thinkers May Help You Understand the Current Political
Mess

━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

I needed some comfort.

Then one day, as I was going about my chores while listening to a philosophy
podcast, I heard these words:

“Remember that all we have is ‘on loan’ from Fortune, which can reclaim it
without our permission  –  indeed, without even advance notice.”

The quote was by Roman philosopher Seneca, who died almost two millennia ago.
It was part of an episode which aired six years ago. Yet, I felt like I was
being directly counselled, almost admonished, at that very moment.

As these words offered up the idea that nothing I cherished or held on to in my
life was truly mine in the first place, I felt a weird sense of relief wash
over me. How can you fret about something you do not control?

I don’t know if this is what people seek when they thumb through religious
texts for answers and epiphanies, but it certainly felt a lot like it. I mulled
over Seneca’s words all day and then spent the next few weeks absorbing his
works and everything I could get my hands on about his life and philosophy.

I learned about a man who was born into a rich home and yet spent a life
preaching about the evils of wealth and material comforts:

“Until we have begun to go without them, we fail to realise how unnecessary
many things are.”

I found a philosopher who wrote letters of consolation to his mother after
himself being unjustly exiled from his home town and stripped of his titles:

“I am suffering nothing… All those blessings which Fortune kindly bestowed on
me  –  money, public office, influence –  I relegated to a place whence she
could claim them back without bothering me.”

And I discovered the calm, unwavering courage of an advisor who at the behest
of his deranged ruler Nero, was eventually forced to take his own life:

“I cannot escape death, but at least I can escape the fear of it.”

Reading about Seneca’s words, life and philosophy helped me come to terms with
the impermanence of the things I hold dear. It made me realise that if there
was anything that I had lost during the pandemic, it was the delusion that I
had control over my life.

━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

Also read: Revisiting the Concept of Absurdity in Today’s Covid-Ridden World

━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

It also helped me confront the fact that while my future was unclear and the
world was indeed in dire straits, so many of my anxieties were founded on
needlessly fearful ‘what-ifs’. One of my worst panic attacks happened during
the lockdown because a little lethargy had led my anxious brain to the
conclusion that I was infected and dying. As Seneca puts it in ‘On Peace of
Mind’,

“We suffer more often in imagination than in reality.”

When I had decided to pursue some words I heard on a philosophy podcast during
the lockdown, it wasn’t in search of answers or comfort. Philosophy to me has
always been a fun curiosity, some food for the mind and a great topic for
conversation.

But call it serendipity, divine intervention – or just a long enforced period
of anxiety – which took me to places I would never otherwise have looked at, I
ended up finding some much-needed perspective and a whole lot of comfort in
philosophy. It came to my rescue at a time when I could have easily gone down a
rabbit hole of dread and despair.

That is not to say that I now pray at the altar of Seneca or have turned into
an evangelist of philosophy. Seneca is just one philosopher, and his life and
works remain a topic of much debate. And I understand that delving into
philosophy might not necessarily offer comfort to everyone.

But what I learned from discovering philosophy during one of the hardest times
in my life was to cope with adversity by reframing my perspective. With or
without religious associations, every branch of philosophy, ranging from
Seneca’s Stoicism to the Chinese tradition of Taoism, offers a way to approach
life’s trials from new, unusual angles.

Along with science and art, philosophy now has a place in my belief system as a
discipline that challenges my assumptions and helps me discover new ways to
cope with existence when it gets burdensome. We need all the help we can get
because as Seneca once said,

“Sometimes even to live is an act of courage.”

Akanksha Dhyani is a Mumbai-based freelance writer.

Featured image credit: Wikipedia

