Wealth distribution data are notoriously difficult to interpret. This is
because variations in stock prices affect wealth distribution, so that a stock
market boom suddenly makes the rich appear much richer, while a stock market
collapse makes wealth distribution less unequal overnight. In other words, the
fact that the rich hold a part of their wealth in the form of stocks makes it
difficult to estimate their total wealth which now has one durable component
and another that is potentially evanescent.

There are certain occasions, however, when one can say something definitive
about wealth distribution; and the period of the pandemic has been one such
occasion. There can be little doubt that during the months of the pandemic,
even while millions of working people all over the world were suffering from
acute loss of employment and income, the world’s billionaires added hugely to
their wealth; and this certainly meant an increase in wealth inequality in the
world.

According to a report by the Swiss bank, UBS, mentioned in The Guardian of
October 7, the wealth of the world’s billionaires increased by 27.5% between
April and July this year, the period when the pandemic was at its peak. Their
wealth by the end of July had touched a record high of $10.2 trillion or £7.8
trillion. The previous peak of billionaires’ wealth was $8.9 trillion at the
end of 2017. Since then, while the number of billionaires has increased
slightly from 2,158 to 2,189, their wealth has increased considerably. In fact,
between end of 2017 and end of July 2020, per capita wealth of the billionaires
has increased by 13%. The point, however, is that this increase is the net
result of two contradictory movements: a fall until April 2020 and a sharp rise
by 27.5% thereafter until end-July.

This rise has a particular significance. Since large masses of people hardly
own any wealth and what little they own does not fluctuate much in value unlike
stock market prices, an increase in stock prices increases ipso facto wealth
inequality in society, and, conversely, a reduction in stock prices reduces
wealth inequality. A firm conclusion, we have seen, about the magnitude of
change in wealth inequality becomes difficult to draw.

The increase in wealth inequality after April, however, is altogether
different. According to a UBS spokesperson, when stock prices were falling
prior to April 2020, the billionaires not only did not sell off their stocks in
a panic, but actually bought up stocks from smaller owners who were engaged in
panic-selling. As a result, when stock prices increased after April, they got
enormous capital gains. These gains arose essentially because the small
stock-owners did not have the capacity to hold on to their stocks. Thus, the
increase in concentration of wealth during the pandemic was not just vis-à-vis
the very poor, who are without any wealth anyway, but also vis-à-vis small
wealth holders. It was not just the spontaneous effect of a general rise in
stock prices; it was a specific act of what Marx had called centralisation of
capital.

In his book, Imperialism, Lenin had said that every crisis under capitalism,
whether economic or political, becomes an occasion for centralisation of
capital; one has to add medical crises to Lenin’s list, indeed every possible
kind of crisis.

The usual mechanism for centralisation is the ruin that visits small capitalist
producers during a crisis (it also visits petty producers but their decimation
is covered under the term primitive accumulation of capital, rather than
centralisation), and hence those, typically smaller banks or credit agencies,
that had financed them. All these are either taken over by larger companies, or
simply go under, leaving the field open for larger companies to encroach upon
the space hitherto occupied by them.

In addition to this mechanism for centralisation, there is also the sheer
fusion of capitals, the pooling together of vast masses of small capitals into
a few large ones, such as what the banks or the stock market bring about. This
constitutes another mechanism, a powerful one at that, of centralisation.

What we have seen during the pandemic is yet another mechanism of
centralisation, different from the above two, arising from the inability of
small wealth-holders to face stock price collapses that the billionaires can
face. This ability of billionaires has nothing to do with any “courage”, or
“guts” or “entrepreneurship” or any of those supposed virtues that capitalist
mythology invests them with; it has simply to do with the fact that they are
big.

Because they are big, they can afford to take stock price fluctuations in their
stride, and even make massive gains from the inability of small wealth-holders
to do so. In fact, ironically their ability to withstand stock price
fluctuations arises not from their being “risk-takers” but from their being
precisely the opposite, namely, averse to taking risks.

Their being rich implies that they can afford the luxury of not taking risks,
i.e. the luxury of “safety”. Hence they hold their wealth in a diversified form
to minimise risk, and stocks are only one of the forms in which they hold their
wealth. When stock market prices collapse to an unusual degree, as happens with
any unprecedented crisis, they can remain unperturbed, while smaller
wealth-holders are taken unawares. The large wealth-holders use this
opportunity to make gains from the woes of smaller stock-holders who start
selling stocks in desperation.

An example will make the point clear. If I have Rs.100 of wealth, then I would
like to hold it in a form that gives me a large enough income even if there is
a danger of my making capital losses. My preference is not because I like
taking risks, but because I need the income desperately. So, I shall put all my
wealth, say, into stocks. By contrast, if I have Rs.1 million, then I already
have ample income anyway and I can afford to hold, say, only half of my wealth
in the form of stocks and the other half in the form of bank balances, which
hardly give any income. If there is a 10% fall in stock prices, then while the
small stock-holder loses 10% of his wealth, the large stock-holder loses only
5% (i.e. 10% on half his wealth). The latter, therefore, can afford to take the
fall in his/her stride, while the former cannot. And when in desperation, to
prevent further losses, the former starts selling stocks, the latter, i.e. the
large stock-holder, buys up these stocks and holds them till the market turns
more favourable.

Stock market fluctuations are common under capitalism; but the falls are much
sharper during crises, no matter how they are caused. And this is precisely the
period when the large wealth-holders make a killing at the expense of the
smaller ones. Centralisation occurs with a vengeance during such periods.

This entire process while carried out vis-à-vis small wealth-holders, is
reminiscent of the primitive accumulation of capital inflicted upon petty
producers.

If the large wealth-holders buy stocks worth (genuinely) Rs.100 from smaller
ones at Rs.100, then there is no net gain for them. To pay for this purchase,
they have to either run down their cash balances or to borrow from banks or to
sell some other asset they own. In all these cases, there is no increase in the
net assets they own (or their “net worth”). But if they purchase stocks worth
Rs.100 for only Rs.50 because of a crash in stock prices, and, say, borrow this
amount from a bank, then when stock prices recover to their true value, they
would have expanded their net worth by Rs.50. Larger stock-holders in this case
would have enriched themselves at the expense of the smaller ones by Rs.50,
which is analogous to primitive accumulation of capital.

The UBS spokesperson claimed that the increase in wealth concentration during
the pandemic was a phenomenon alien to capitalism. He could not have been more
wrong. It is entirely in conformity with the logic of capitalism. In fact, it
is inevitable under capitalism that every human tragedy which unleashes a
crisis in this system becomes an occasion for an increase in wealth
concentration through the mechanism just outlined.

This increase in wealth concentration has happened in country after country,
including even in India, where, according to the same source, the wealth of
Indian billionaires has increased by 35% over the same period to $423 billion (
The Wire, October 16). Over this period, output has contracted by almost a
quarter, and so has employment; this contrast gives an idea of the modus
operandi of capitalism.

