The erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir, now the union territory of J&K,
attained 100% open defecation free status in September 2018, well before the
Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) deadline of 2 October 2019. However, the
movement of women in flocks to fields as it gets dark portrays quite a
different picture. Do the so-called individual household latrines exist only on
paper, while being incomplete and non-functional in reality? Are these not
being used due to cultural barriers and socialisation? What policy steps are
needed to effect change in rural sanitation behaviour? To answer these
questions and suggest a way forward, a micro-study was carried out in Bishnah
block of Jammu district.

Coffey and Spears (2018) observed that although rural life is changing quickly,
the census and other data sources suggest that latrine adoption is lagging in
India. To substantiate their findings, they cite the World Health Organization
and the United Nations Children’s Fund Joint Monitoring Report (2017),
according to which more than half the households that practise open defecation
globally reside in rural India. They further state that, according to the 2011
Census, 90% of the Indian households that lack a toilet or latrine are located
in rural India. They analyse data from the National Family Health Survey
(NFHS-4) to further support their position.

Refuting the basis as well as the findings of Coffey and Spears (2018), Yougal
Joshi (2018) observed that under the Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM),^1 rural
sanitation coverage increased from 39% in October 2014 to 50% in October 2016,
63% in October 2017, and over 85% June 2018. This means that rural sanitation
coverage more than doubled since the programme began in 2014. The fact is that
rural sanitation in the country has indeed made signiﬁcant progress in the last
few years. Joshi (2018) further observed that the NFHS-4, on which Coffey and
Spears’ (2018) findings were based, was undertaken over a period of 24 months,
between January 2015 and December 2016. It showed that rural sanitation
coverage increased from 40% to 58% between 2015 and 2016, respectively. Joshi
argued that such a long survey period in a fast-moving programme makes the
ﬁndings of the survey unrepresentative, inconclusive, and a gross
underestimation of the present reality. To conclude his point, he stated that
over 7.6 crore toilets had been built across villages in India, accompanied by
a strong focus on changing sanitation behaviours. As a result, nearly four lakh
villages, 400 districts, and 17 states and union territories in the country
were declared open defecation free (ODF) ODF as of July 2018. In mid-2018, when
Joshi’s article was published, it appeared that rural India was well on its way
to becoming free from open defecation before the proposed deadline of 2 October
2019, the 150th birth anniversary of M K Gandhi (Joshi 2018).

From the foregoing discussion, one can see the emergence of two contradicting
narratives. On 2 October 2019, all the villages in the 36 states and union
territories of India were declared ODF. The India map on the SBM (Grameen)
website, which recorded pro­gress towards the 100% ODF goal, turned entirely
green, indicating that the policy’s ambitious goal had been achieved. However,
a survey released by the National Statistical Office (NSO) in November 2019
claimed that about 28.7% of rural households across India still lacked access
to any form of latrines. Moreover, it stated that 3.5% of those who have access
to latrines do not use it (Hindu 2020). The SBM data and the NSO data
contradict each other; this may be because the SBM data does not account for
behavioural changes, which are extre­mely hard to achieve. This raises the
following questions: Has the scheme also set in motion behavioural changes
regarding sanitation practices and beliefs and myths around toilet usage in
proportion to the provision of individual household latrines (IHHLs)? Is this
even remotely possible?

On 15 September 2018, the then governor of Jammu and Kashmir (J&K), Satya Pal
Malik, while launching a fortnight-long cleanliness campaign called “Swachhta
Hi Seva,” declared J&K 100% ODF. “All the 22 districts, 4,171 gram panchayats
and 7,565 villages in the state are self-declared ODF as per Swachh Bharat
Mission (Grameen) (SBM-G) guidelines,” he stated (DNA 2018). He further
observed that apart from constructing 1.1 million IHHLs and 1,350 community
sanitary complexes (CSM) in the state, the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan had played a
vital role in bringing about behavioural changes in people. The declaration was
made on the basis of information furnished to him by the authorities concerned.
The leading local daily of the state, Daily Excelsior (2018a), observed,

    However, complete ignorance of several vital aspects by the authorities
    concerned has belied the claims of the Government about achieving ODF
    status for the State, sources said, adding “slum dwellers in different
    parts of the State have not been covered under the Swachh Bharat Mission
    and majority of them are still defecating in open right under the nose of
    the concerned authorities ... people defecating along the railway tracks
    and in the fields in rural parts of the State is still a common scene and
    this has also clearly established that J&K has achieved Open Defecation
    Free status only on the papers.

It further said,

    During the drive under the Mission even nomadic population has not been
    covered and majority of the nomads are still indulging in open defecation …
    It seems that Government has declared J&K Open Defecation Free only by
    constructing the number of Individual Household Toilets and Community
    Sanitary Complexes projected at the launch of the Swachh Bharat Mission by
    the Union Government instead of looking into all the aspects relating to
    the menace.

The study was carried out in Bishnah block of Jammu district using the
non-participant observation method, a focused group discussion (FGD), and
personal interviews. Bishnah block was purposively chosen as it is close to
Jammu city, with some of its peripheral villages lying in the border belt. Five
villages in Bishnah block (Deoli, Laswara, Makhanpur, Chak Tahir, and Salehar)
along the Arnia–Salehar connecting route were selected for non-participant
observation. Salehar, being the most populated among the studied villages, was
chosen for an in-depth FGD. From each village, few groups of women walking to
and from the fields were observed. The FGD included 15 women drawn from the
different mohallas of the village. The conversations were carried out in Hindi
as well as the local language, Dogri.

Observations from the Field

Located 26 km from Jammu city, Salehar village (Salaeher in the census) is
situated in Bishnah block and tehsil. It has a total population of 4,941, with
2,560 males and 2,381 females. The majority of the inhabitants are from the
Scheduled Castes (SCs) (3,599 in total; 1,869 males and 1,730 females), while
the Scheduled Tribes (STs) population is 105 (54 males and 51 females). There
are 1,022 households in the village and the population density is eight persons
per hectare (Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, India).
The village also hosts around 90 migrant labour families living in
jhuggi-jhopri clusters—small, roughly built houses or shelters made of mud,
wood or metal having thatch or tin sheet roof covering. They mostly work in the
brick kilns and as construction and agriculture labourers.

Open defecation continues to be practised both in rural and urban settings by
men, women, and children, although it is less common in urban areas. In an open
letter to the editor of Daily Excelsior, one Krishan Kant Sharma, resident of
Channi Himmat Housing Colony, Jammu expressed,

    Surprises (sic) to read the news. Is it April fool? Almost every day I see
    small kids of migrant labourers, lined up along main roads of Channi Himmat
    Colony in the morning easing themselves and their parents/brother-sisters
    searching places in drains and across Narwal-Kunjwani Road in hundreds from
    5 to 7 am daily. Whosoever has submitted the report is ignorant of ground
    realities. He must visit Narwal-Kunjwani Road, Roopnagar Bantalab Road,
    Ploura, Muthi Dumana Road, Patta-Sangrampur road between 5 to 7 am and see
    thousands of migrants easing nearby roads. (Daily Excelsior 2018b)

The above observation pertains specifically to Jammu city and its peripheral
areas, but as one moves towards the linking roads leading to the rural
hinterlands, similar scenes are a common sight. During the non-participant
observation in the villages under study, women were seen going to and sitting
in the fields during the wee hours and late evenings to answer nature’s call.
One can spot men, women, and children defecating on both sides of the road
after it gets dark. I observed the same scene village after village without
exception.

Historically, the rural sanitation programme in India began in 1954 as part of
the First Five Year Plan (1951–56) of the Government of India. But owing to
confusion and inconsistency with regard to the sanitation component, nothing
substantial was achieved. In fact, the 1981 Census revealed that rural
sanitation coverage was only 1%. The United Nations designated 1981–90 as the
International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade to mobilise
initiatives to improve clean water supply and sanitation worldwide. In
response, the Government of India introduced the Central Rural Sanitation
Programme (CRSP) in 1986 to improve the quality of life of rural people and
provide privacy and dignity to women. Though improving rural sanitation and
health continue to be a priority for the government after independence, the
target is yet to be achieved as per the findings of the present study, which
reflects the situation in rural settings in J&K at least.

During the FGD in Salehar, the women said that most of them, as well as the
other residents in their respective wards, defecated in the open, irrespective
of the availability of IHHLs. One can gauge the depth of the issue from the
fact that out of the 15 women who participated in the FGD, only one had an
IHHL. Based on the insights provided by the participating women, village
households can broadly be categorised as: (i) households without toilets; (ii)
households with non-functional toilets; and (iii) households having functional
toilets but restricted usage.

Households without toilets include the village population without toilets as
well as the migrant population in the village living in jhuggi-jhopris that are
not equipped with toilets. Let us first address the issue of migrant labourers.
Although female migrant labourers were not a part of the FGD, since the purpose
of the study was to minutely understand the contradictions inherent in the
larger picture of J&K being declared ODF at the village, block, district, and
state level, it is appropriate to shed some light on the concerns of migrant
labourers. To this end, sufficient information was shared by the participating
women. In the revised guidelines for SBM-G released in October 2017, the word
“migrant” figures just once, wherein motivators/swachhagrahis are encouraged to
ensure that any new houses that come up post ODF achievement be constructed
with IHHLs. They must also create provisions for visitors/migrants in the form
of a community toilet or any other means. The term “community” in the term
community sanitary complex (CSC) includes labourers (both permanent and
temporary). According to the guidelines, CSCs could be used by the local
administration to provide for those labourers who are ineligible for incentives
under the SBM-G. As far as the village under study is concerned, no CSC has
been constructed, which means that migrant labourers have been completely
excluded from benefits, although sanitation is one of their basic human rights.
One can safely assume from these facts that the migrant labourers residing
within the village are openly defecating in fields, debunking the government’s
myth of an ODF J&K right at the unit level.

During the interaction, villagers reported that the selection criteria for
receiving the SBM-G benefit were unclear. Under the programme, selected
households were entitled to receive `12,000, which would cover IHHL
construction costs and provide for water availability, including for storing
for handwashing and toilet cleaning. Eligible households included all below
poverty line (BPL) households; SC/ST above poverty line (APL) households; small
and marginal farmers; landless labourers with homesteads; households headed by
women and persons with physical disabilities. However, while executing the
scheme, several other criteria were introduced, as revealed during the FGD. For
example, households where any family member was engaged in government service
were excluded.

Some households had been provided with toilets in the 1980s, which, over time,
had become dysfunctional. Some of the families had dismantled their
dysfunctional toilets, while others had put them to various other uses like
storing hay, fodder, cow-dung cakes, etc. These households were not provided
toilets under SBM-G as per the respondents. The block development officer
(BDO),^2 while detailing the reasons for the same, clarified that the SBM-G
aimed at providing toilets to only those households that did not have toilets
as per the baseline survey carried out in 2012–13. The Ministry of Drinking
Water and Sanitation (nd) had developed an online monitoring system for SBM-G
where household-level data with respect to sanitation facilities in all gram
panchayats in the country were made available by state governments in the form
of a baseline survey. The households that had benefited from earlier government
schemes in the 1980s were not included in the baseline survey, making it
utterly faulty to begin with. This disadvantaged a considerable number of
households across the region.

Sociologically, every family undergoes a cycle or a process of development,
evolving from nuclear to joint to nuclear again depending upon the size of the
joint household. The baseline survey conducted before the launch of the scheme
was completely devoid of this basic understanding; hence, it turned out to be
faulty and excluded a significant number of households from benefiting under
the scheme. For example, one of the participants stated that her family had
been provided a toilet 28–30 years ago under her father-in-law’s name, which
had since become non-functional. But in the present scheme, neither her nor her
brother-in-law’s household were given any benefit. In addition, some of the
stakeholders from the village shared that nearly 248 households were to be
provided toilets by 15 August 2018, but the deadline was missed. They were told
that they will be given the benefit later. The BDO mentioned that the
households that were left out will be identified and shall be covered under SBM
Plus.

Cultural Barriers

Open defecation in India is robustly correlated with religion as originally
explored by Geruso and Spears (2018) and is not driven by poverty—it is common
even among households that own assets such as televisions and mobile phones
(Coffey and Spears 2018). Geruso and Spears (2018) observed that despite
relative economic advantage, India’s majo­rity Hindu population is 25
percentage points more likely to defecate in the open—that is, in open places
such as in fields, behind bushes, or near roads—than the minority Muslim
population. Sanitation practices may have evolved differently across Muslim and
Hindu communities for purely secular reasons and could have been optimal for
private or social reasons given the context under which they arose. Specific
religious instructions with respect to sanitation and hygiene that we observe
today may have been established long ago—codifying then existent norms, rather
than establishing those norms. While Geruso and Spears admit taking no position
on whether religion causes open defecation per se, it is common for Indians to
discuss waste disposal choices with reference to religious purity.

Given that the region under study is dominantly Hindu, the findings of Geruso
and Spears (2018) are relevant to the insights provided by a gram sevak or
village development officer^3 I interviewed. The gram sevak revealed that it is
difficult for people in rural settings to accept relieving themselves within
their houses, which are closed spaces with the kitchen and place of worship in
the same domain. According to her, people have internalised easing themselves
in the open as being a natural process, and they are reluctant to perform the
same act in a closet. The idea of pollution and purity, which originated
primarily in Hinduism, deeply influences the continuation of this practice.
Toilets and defecation (being unholy and mundane) are associated with pollution
and polluting acts. On the other hand, food, the kitchen, and worship are
considered sacred. The two opposing practices are to be separated and kept
apart. The idea of bringing the two to the same level by performing them in the
same space is considered unacceptable. The continued practice of open
defecation despite the availability of toilets in certain households is thus
inherent and embedded in religious ideas. Inhibitions regarding toilet use
largely arise from habits and continuous socialisation across generations.

A 14-year-old girl who accompanied her mother for the FGD described the ease of
open defecation as “Achcha lagta hai bahar jana” (I like going out). One can
easily infer the behavioural adaptations through the socialisation processes
involved. This closely relates to the findings of Coffey et al (2014) regarding
preferences for open defecation. Their study revealed that of the people who
defecate in the open, 47% explained that they do so because it is pleasurable,
comfortable, or convenient. They also said that defecating in the open provided
them an opportunity to take a morning walk, see their fields, and take in the
fresh air. Many people regarded open defecation as part of a wholesome,
healthy, and virtuous life.

Topography and Gender

Other than religion and cultural practices, several other factors were found to
be correlated with the practice of open defecation. Doron and Jeffrey (2014)
identified 11 features that play a role in determining people’s acceptance of
and access to controlled ways of dealing with human waste. These features are
often interrelated and overlapping: (i) class, (ii) caste, (iii) sociability,
(iv) urban life, (v) rural life, (vi) diversity, (vii) topo­graphy, (viii)
technology, (ix) gender, (x) education, and (xi) crisis. The geo­graphy and
topography of an area play an important role in the practice of open
defecation. The extreme cold weather in hilly terrains such as in Kashmir and
Ladakh (Ladakh was a part of the erstwhile state of J&K and has now been
separated as the union territory [UT] of Ladakh) is partly responsible for
people not opting for open defecation, whereas in the plains, it is a common
practice. People in the plains prefer to use open fields for defecation, while
in the Kandi^4 belt, people prefer using khads.^5

Whatever the type of terrain, women and men find it difficult to access open
spaces during the rainy season as well as when the crops are ready for harvest,
although the crops give them privacy during the act. Hiding behind bushes or in
pits and using fields with standing crops while defecating in the open allows
people to defecate comfortably and helps maintain privacy, which is merely a
mental construct as the privacy is not really achieved. It helps those using
fields for open defecation avoid the awkwardness that could occur if seen by
someone of the opposite sex. This might force the one defecating to abruptly
get up in the middle of the act, which could be physically disrupting and
uncomfortable. It is difficult for women to access open fields after the crops
have been harvested as well as during the sowing season, as the presence of men
in the fields increases manifold and most of them spend the entire day working
in the fields.

Vulnerability and Privacy

When probed about the difficulties faced while defecating in the open, the
women respondents stated that in some villages, there are separate areas for
men and women to defecate. However, in most villages, there is no such
demarcation. On seeing women head in a particular direction or sitting, men
generally change their track and move away and vice versa. However, one of the
respondents very angrily stated that there are some men who walk past
deliberately in order to harass and intimidate women. Women feel vulnerable
going to the fields alone, which is the reason they go in groups. During the
FGD, Prakasho Rani expressed,

    It’s not easy. During the act, we have to get up many a time on seeing the
    men approach. They can come from any direction. Sometimes they change their
    track or move past with their head down. We keep standing with our backs
    turned. If we use roadside pavements at night, the lights of moving
    vehicles disturb us. Sometimes, we get up and turn to the other side; at
    other times, we keep sitting. If the vehicle or people come from the left,
    we turn our face towards the right, and if they approach from the right, we
    turn our face to the left but keep sitting.

During the study, many women and children were seen sitting on the roadside
after dark. Women also highlighted that while going to the fields, they have to
pass several groups of men and young boys standing along the way. While elderly
women are unbothered by this, young girls find it awkward. Questioning the
men’s behaviour can lead to issues between families of different castes. If the
boys are from a higher caste or are economically well-off, lower caste families
avoid confronting them, lest it sour their relations further. The power
relations built into caste hierarchies still control social relations in the
village.

Health Hazards

Open defecation is a major health hazard and causes significant hardships,
especi­ally to rural women (Dhaktode 2014). As a part of the socialisation
process, women are trained to control their bowel movements and relieve
themselves only in the early mornings or late evenings. This is a long-term
health hazard. Controlling bowel movements for hours impacts women’s health
directly. Defecating in the open impacts all, irrespective of age, gender, and
class. The release of germs into the environment harms everyone in equal
measure. The respondents had a limited understanding of the health hazards
concerned as a result of their world view. For example, Savita Devi during the
FGD remarked, “When you defecate in the open, the foul smell fades away in the
open air, but if you use the toilet in the house, you are consuming the same
foul smell, which may lead to several diseases.” From this, one can infer how
they make sense of their own socialised behaviour.

In Conclusion

This microstudy undertaken in Salehar village in Bishnah block of Jammu
district categorically points to the major lacunae in the execution of the
SBM-G, which failed to meet its goal of attaining 100% ODF status for J&K. The
baseline survey, which was the basis for identi­fying the beneficiaries of the
SBM-G, excluded a considerable number of families. This suggests that
policymakers must be more far-sighted and account for infrastructural wear and
tear over time. If one family was provided a toilet in the 1980s, keeping the
family’s development cycle in mind, there is every likelihood that that family
grew into separate household units, which ideally should have been identified
and given the benefit.

The study also brings out that the mere provision of IHHLs does not ensure that
it is being used, as was evident in the study area. While material changes are
easy to make, non-material, subjective changes occur slowly, leading to a
cultural lag. As far as sanitation and health are concerned, consistent
community interventions over a long period of time are suggested as a way to
help people get over their ingrained habit of open defecation, which has its
foundations in the religious belief system. The urgent need for building CSCs
in every village is reiterated to safeguard the rights of migrant labourers. A
bottom-up approach by the government and interventions by social scientists
while developing and executing schemes such as SBM-G are likely to give desired
results.

Notes

1 Swachh Bharat Abhiyan (SBA) or Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) is a nationwide
campaign implemented in India in 2014–19. It aimed to clean up the streets,
roads and infrastructure of India’s cities, smaller towns, and rural areas. The
campaign’s official name is in Hindi and translates to Clean India Mission. The
objectives of SBM include eliminating open defecation through the construction
of household-owned and community-owned toilets and establishing an accountable
mechanism of monitoring toilet use. Run by the Government of India, the mission
aimed to achieve an ODF India by 2 October 2019, the 150th anniversary of the
birth of M K Gandhi, by constructing 90 million toilets in rural India at a
projected cost of `1.96 lakh crore ($30 billion) (Business Standard 2016). The
mission also aimed to contribute to India reaching Sustainable Development Goal
Number 6.

2 Personal Interview on 22 September 2018.

3 Personal Interview on 22 September 2018.

4 The submontane tract in the outer Himalayas of the Jammu division of Jammu
and Kashmir is locally termed the Kandi belt. This unit is an extension of the
Kandi belt in the states of Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, and Uttaranchal.
The upper portion of the Kandi belt consists of low hills covered by shrubs and
forest, and the lower terrain has cultivated lands and gully beds. It has an
undulating topography—steep and irregular slopes, erodible and low water
retentive soil, and badly dissected terrain by numerous gullies (National
Institue of Hydrology 2010). The undulating slope, adjacent to the plains at an
elevation of 300 m between the Ravi and Chenab rivers, is locally known as
Kandi. The Kandi land is characterised by numerous torrents, hilly soil, and a
scarcity of water. Consequently, agriculture in the Kandi tract is largely
dependent on rainfall. There is immense soil erosion during the rainy season.
Cultivation of maize, mil­lets, pulses, oilseeds, and fodder and rearing of
cattle are the primary economic activities in the Kandi region (Your Article
Library 2018).

5 Situated in the vicinity of the Siwalik Hills, the outer plains of the Jammu
division are traversed by numerous hill torrents, locally known as khad. These
torrents remain dry over most of the winter and summer and grow enormous during
rains. When it rains, the ravines are transformed into gushing torrents and it
is difficult to ford them. Occasionally, if floods occur, these torrents
transport massive quantities of sand, red silt, pebbles, and shingles. The
channel of these tor­rents is characterised by clumps of reed growth known as
khar (Your Article Library 2018).

References

Business Standard (2016): “MDWS Intensifies Efforts with States to Implement
Swachh Bharat Mission,” 19 March, https://www.business-standard.com/article/
government-press-release/
mdws-intensifies-efforts-with-states-to-implement-swachh-bharat-mission-116031801084_1.html
.

Census (1981): “A Handbook of Population Statistics,” Office of the Registrar
General and Census Commissioner, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India,
https://censusindia.gov.in/DigitalLibrary/data/Census_1981/Publication/I....

— (2011): “2011 Census Data,” Office of the Registrar General and Census
Commissioner, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, https://
censusindia.gov.in/2011-common/censusdata2011.html.

Coffey, Diane and Dean Spears (2018): “Open Defecation in Rural India, 2015–16
Levels and Trends in NFHS-4,” Economic & Political Weekly, Vol 53, No 9, pp
10–13.

Coffey, Diane, Aashish Gupta, Payal Hathi, Nidhi Khurana, Dean Spears, Nikhil
Srivastav and Sangita Vyas (2014): “Revealed Preference for Open Defecation:
Evidence from a New Survey in Rural North India,” Economic & Political Weekly,
Vol 49, No 38, pp 38–55.

Daily Excelsior (2018a): “Several Ignored Aspects Belie J&K Govt’s Claim about
Achieving 100% ODF Status,” 19 September, http://www.dailyexcelsior.com/
several-ignored-aspects-belie-jk-govts-claim-achieving-100-odf-status/.

— (2018b): “J&K as Open Defecation Free,” 19 September, http://
www.dailyexcelsior.com/jk-open-defecation-free/.

Dhaktode, Nitin (2014): “Freedom from Open Defecation: Role of the Community,”
Economic & Political Weekly, Vol 49, No 20, pp 28–30.

DNA (2018): “Jammu and Kashmir Declared Open Defecation Free,” 5 September,
https://www.dnaindia.com/india/
report-jammu-and-kashmir-declared-open-defecation-free-2663551.

Doron, Assa and Robin Jeffrey (2014): “Open Defectaion in India,” Economic &
Political Weekly, Vol 49, No 49, pp 72–78.

Geruso, Michael and Dean Spears (2018): “Neighbourhood Sanitation and Infant
Mortality,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol 10, No 2, pp
125–62.

Hindu (2020): “Is Rural India 100% Open Defecation Free like Swacch Bharat Data
Concludes?” 2 January, https://www.thehindu.com/data/
data-mismatch-is-rural-india-100-open-defe....

Joshi, Yugal (2018): “The Real Status of Rural Sanitation,” Economic &
Political Weekly, Vol 53, No 28, pp 100–101.

Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (nd): Swacch Bharat Mission
(Grameen), Government of India, http://sbm.gov.in/sbmdashboard/Default.aspx.

National Institue of Hydrology (2010): “Hydrological Problems in the Kandi Belt
of Jammu Region: A Research Report by the National Institute of Hydrology,”
India Water Portal, http://www.indiawaterportal.org/articles/
hydrological-problems-kandi-bel....

Your Article Library (2018): “Physical Regions of Jammu and Kashmir (Explained
with Map),” http://www.yourarticlelibrary.com/india-2/
physical-regions-of-jammu-and-....

